Design for better configuration granularity of X.509 chain verification (#30085)
openssl/openssl: doc/designs/libcrypto_x509_granularity.md

==================================================================

Currently OpenSSL has a quite limited support of setting the requirements for
X.509 verification.  SECLEVEL parameter allows this check in TLS context. For
regular X.509 verification it is not granular enough.

This document describes possible configuration mechanism providing a better
granularity and level of system control.

We propose new section, [crypto_algorithm_limits] with the following parameters:

**PermittedAlgorithms** enumerates the algorithms that are only permitted in the
chain.  If present, the certificates having a different algorithm should be
considered invalid in the context of chain building.  If absent, any algorithm
is permitted.

For each algorithm (mostly relevant for RSA and EC) there may be a subsection
named [crypto_algorithm_limits_ALGNAME] with algorithm-dependent parameters. If
present, the alg-specific limitations are applied.

Example configuration
---------------------

[crypto_algorithm_limits]
PermittedAlgorithm = RSA,EC,ML-DSA-65,SOME-UNKNOWN-ALGORITHM

[crypto_algorithm_limits_RSA]
MinBits=2048

[crypto_algorithm_limits_EC]

> Curves=P-521

Reviewer: It would be better if we made use of already existing syntax for grouping sub-parameters, for example something like this:

```
[crypto_algorithm_limits]
RSA = @RSA_limits
EC = @EC_limits
MLDSA65 = @MLDSA65_limits
UNKNOWN = @UNKNOWN_limits

[RSA_limits]
MinBits=2048

[EC_limits]
Curves=P-521

[MLDSA65_limits]
# Override the name given in @crypto_algorithm_limits
id = ML-DSA-65

[UNKNOWN_limits]
# Override the name given in @crypto_algorithm_limits
id = SOME-UNKNOWN-ALGORITHM
```

Limitations of the proposed design
----------------------------------

It will work well for the known algorithms but it's not obvious how to extend
it to the algorithms not known to the library but provided by 3rd-party

> providers in case when the algorithms are parameterized.

Author: The `_isa` functions allow us per-algorithm filtering. If we want smth more deep, we will have to look into parameters

> providers in case when the algorithms are parameterized.

Reviewer: Note that some of these limits will require to figure out the key type(s) that's supported by a signature algorithm.  `OSSL_FN_signature_query_key_types` is your friend in this case.

In theory syntax like

[crypto_algorithm_limits_SOME-UNKNOWN-ALGORITHM]
ParamName1=PARAM1
ParamLimit1=LIMIT1

> ParamLimitType=MinValue|enum-values

Reviewer 2: Flag day / time. Most signature transitions are not after - this is true for NIST size transitions and also CA/B forum where certain signatures types / size are no longer allowed to be treated as valid if created after a certain point in time.

Java supports this - such that signatures before a given date of signature are valid; but after a certain date invalid.

Note this is unrelated to the system clock, but the timestamp of the signature if available in a given format (true for CMS / X.509).

Introducing configuration granularity for X.509 chain verification
==================================================================

Currently OpenSSL has a quite limited support of setting the requirements for
X.509 verification.  SECLEVEL parameter allows this check in TLS context. For
regular X.509 verification it is not granular enough.

This document describes possible configuration mechanism providing a better
granularity and level of system control.

We propose new sections, [OPNAME_algorithm_limits] to specify the parameters
for particular algorithms. OPNAME as of now can be `sign` or `verify`.

> This sections contain the algorithms that are only permitted in the

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This section contains the algorithms that are only permitted in the
```

Author: Fixed, thanks!

chain.  If present, the certificates having a different algorithm should be
considered invalid in the context of chain building.  If absent, any algorithm
is permitted.

For each algorithm (mostly relevant for RSA and EC) there may be a subsection

> named [crypto_algorithm_limits_ALGNAME] with algorithm-dependent parameters. If

Reviewer 3: `crypto_algorithm_limits_ALGNAME` won't be used now

Author: Fixed, thanks!
